--- 
layout: post 
title: Advance Mountaineering Course, NIM
date: 2014-10-14
author: Prashant C Chaturvedi 
categories:
  - course
  - organised
  - mountaineering
tags: 
  - AMC
  - NIM
  - Uttarkashi
description: 'Advance Mountaineering Course, NIM (Nehru Institute Of Mountaineering)'
image: https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1921/44569947464_fd78768f32_o.jpg
image-sm: https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1919/31418060008_feb79a7902_o.jpg
---


After doing Basic Mountaineering Course from HMI, Darjeeling in 2009;
whenever I thought of doing Advance Mountaineering Course it was always
difficult to squeeze out one month time from job. After around 4 years
of job when I was firm that I'll do it at any cost and it's now or
never, I chose [NIM, Uttarkashi](http://www.nimindia.net/). Mostly
because it was giving me chance to explore different part of Himalayas
and also because I'd heard that NIM has better equipments and focuses
more on technical aspect of training. I applied in June 2013, but due to
long queue I had to accept my enrollment in 148th AMC which was in
September 2014.

NIM is considered to be one of the best mountaineering institutes in
Asia which is run by Ministry Of Defense, India and has similar
organizational structure as HMI, Darjeeling or JIM, Pahalgam.

I arrived at Uttarkashi on 12th September 2014, a day before the date of
course commencement. An institute bus was waiting at Uttarkashi bus
stand in the afternoon. After some name check at temporary reception
made at Bhandari Hotel, Uttarkashi , a bus full of students left for the
institute. We checked ourselves in the institute hostel (Tapovan). A
prep talk was scheduled that evening which introduced us about schedule,
and dos and don't of the course.

The A.M.C. of 28 days in NIM is typically divided in 4 phases:
1.  Rock Craft
2.  Ice Craft
3.  Snow Craft
4.  Height Gain 

#### Phase 1: Rock Craft

##### Day 1

On the first day of course, there was an early morning P.T. session. All
39 of us were divided in different groups aka ropes; each 5 or 6 person
strong. Our rope instructor was Subhash Thakur from Himachal Pradesh.
After lunch time everybody was issued with personal, technical and
common equipments. Two climbing ropes were also issued per rope (group) which we,
the rope members, will take turns to carry for the remainder of the
course. Later that day, there was only theory classes on expedition
planning and first aid in auditorium. We're told that we need make a
file for expedition planning and submit it at the end of the course. One
of the aim of the course is to make leaders in mountaineering, so
planning an expedition is something everybody should be aware of. Each
ropes were given a peak for which they were to plan an expedition and
prepare a report. Some of the information e.g. rate list of equipments
etc were provided by instructors to each rope and information about the
peak is supposed to be gathered from books in NIM library.

##### Day 2

This day, we went for a hill walk on a nearby hill with all of our
issued gears in rucksack. This walk was all ascent, ascent and ascent.
After hill walk there was session for revision of knots. Later on that
day, all of were allowed to go out for shopping for necessary equipments
like sunglasses, sunscreen lotions, poncho etc.

##### Day 3 to Day 6
These four days we trekked to Tekhla rock climbing area which is around
8-9 km from institute as told. We carried all the issued load these 4
days.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1968/44380244735_5aeb81f670_o.jpg" alt="Walk to Tekhla Rock Climbing Area"/>
  <figcaption>Trek to Tekhla Rock Climbing Area</figcaption>
</figure>
I was told that few AMC batches used to camp in Tekhla for five days.
Beware of leeches here. NIM has vast and beautiful area for rock
climbing and it is far better than the rock climbing area of HMI in my
opinion. We used to have our rock climbing lectures, demonstrations and
practices here whole day. These Tekhla days allowed us to learn and
practice many techniques of rock craft.
These five days, we used to to start our trek early morning to Tekhla.
When we reach there, we do some stretching exercises and then have our
breakfast. After breakfast we start our rock climbing lessons with our
instructors. We get lunch in Tekhla itself and continued our training till 5 PM. 
We used to get back to our institute by bus in evening.

##### Day 7
On day 7 after morning P.T. we did some climbing on different indoor and
outdoor artificial walls in the institute. It was relatively easier and
a fun day for everybody.

##### Day 8

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1963/44380245155_f5749cab98_o.jpg" alt="Tyrolean Traverse @ Asiganga river"/>
  <figcaption>Tyrolean Traverse @ Asiganga river</figcaption>
</figure>

It was river crossing practice day. We went to a nearby village by bus
on the bank of Asi ganga river. Here we were taught to make and use
[tyrolean traverse](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyrolean_traverse).
Later that day we were given time to try our snow boots and crampons so
that we get it changed if they doesn't fit.


##### Day 9
This day, we left the NIM campus for our camp in Tela. This day we
started our journey by bus from NIM campus early morning after offering
prayers in the temple of NIM campus to Bukki which is on the way to
Gangotri. During this bus journey, we could witness the aftermath of
previous year Uttarakhand disaster. It took around 2 hours to reach
Bukki by bus.

*From Bukki, we'll be trekking through Dingad Valley, named so after a
glacial stream Dingad (gad=stream)  originating from Dokrani Bamak
(bamak = glacier)  which is our training area. The stream originating
from the glacier's melting water later joins many other snow / ice
melted streams and finally merges into Bhagirathi river near Bukki
village. Bukki village is 2 km from the bus terminus situated on the
right bank of Bhagirathi river. On way to Dokriani glacier, one has to
walk 23 km from the road (Bukki village). After crossing the Bhagirathi
river a footpath flows along the steep mountain slopes up to Tela camp
(2500 m), from Tela to Gujjar hut a 12 km run along the Dingad stream is
a route offered to cross the several up and down ridges, many small and
big streams and dense mixed forests of deodar, rhododendron (burans),
oak, pine etc. provide an atmosphere of perfect peace and tranquility.
Gujjar Hut (a summer camp of Gujjars with their cattles) is located at a
height of 3500 m, just 5 km below the Dokriani glacier. Gujjar Hut is
the gateway of the valley.*

*The valley has a gentle slope with different land features formed by
the glacier and surrounded by snow-covered peaks. This place is good for
camping and one can walk up to the glacier and adjoining areas and climb
the small peaks. Only Gujjar huts and a base camp (near the glacier
snout) of Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun lie on the way.
The best season to visit is through out summer and autumn. Besides the
above two glaciers, Kedar, Rudugaira and Jaonli are some other glaciers
which are approachable by the same way.*

We started our trek to Tela camping site (altitude 8200 ft. )from Bhuki
around 10 AM.This trek is around 8 kms. This was decent trek through
dense jungles and was not very tiring except the last few minutes which
was long continuous ascent.  Daily treks to Tekhla had made us stronger.
We reached Tel camp around 1:30 PM and after little cooling down
stretching exercises we had our lunch prepared by NIM cooking staff.
Later we pitched our tents and went for acclimatization walk to a nearby
hill in the evening. It was a beautiful walk through jungle which has
meadows and at the top there was beautiful view of surroundings. At Tel
near our campsite there were few houses of Gujjars and they have cattles
which were tied nearby. Here there is also a small tower installed by
Wadia Institute, Dehradun for weather monitoring.

##### Day 10

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1940/44380246105_50632cf681_o.jpg" alt="Near Khera Taal"/>
  <figcaption>Near Khera Taal</figcaption>
</figure>


This day we had this very long trek from Tel camp to Gujjar Hut
(altitude 11200 ft.). It counts as toughest day so far. We started
early after cleaning Tel campsite and reached Gujjar Hut in the 
afternoon. From Gujjar hut, we started getting nice view of nearby peaks
like Jaonli (6630 meters). The place Gujjar hut was given this name
because of few huts of Gujjars nearby who stay here in summers. We went
for our acclimatization walk to nearby lake Khera Tal (Serpent Lake)
which is a small lake between a vast and very beautiful meadow. Vast
ground surrounded by tall trees with an opens on one side for
magnificent view of peaks Jaonli (6630 meters) and DKD-II (5670 meters).
DKD-II is the peak which we hoped to climb as part of our height gain
phase later in this course. Khera in local language means snake. There
is a story about this lake and a snake living around it which was
previously poisoning a nearby stream Hurra Nala (Nala = a stream )  and
thereby causing deaths in the village which depended on it. There is
also a temple nearby the lake. People of Bhuki village sometimes come
here to offer prayers and stay here overnight. In Feb-April this whole
area is covered with snow. We were told that in month of June, this
valley is full of flowers and there are many butterflies around here.

##### Day 11
<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1961/44569945224_52c42c8494_o.jpg" alt="Base Camp"/>
  <figcaption>Base Camp</figcaption>
</figure>

In morning at Gujjar Hut, we had a class of map reading and get to
practice using GPS devices. Everybody was given three co-ordinates to
point out on map and follow these points using GPS device. These points
were on the way to NIM Base Camp (12300 ft.). Every rope moved ahead
with their instructors to Base Camp with the routes set using three
waypoints given. This trek is relatively small and is around 2.5 km.
Treeline vanishes on the way and we could see only shrubs around there.
After reaching base camp, we pitched our tents and did some cleaning of
the area, cut the grass etc. There was not much for the day.

#### Phase 2: Ice Craft

##### Day 12,13

From this day, our training of ice craft started. The Dokrani glacier is
bit far from base camp. Seems as if glacier has receded a lot. Groups barely found decent walls to
practice. All of the ice was covered with moraine. We cleaned it up for
practicing. Our instructor Subhash Sir found a decent wall to practice
we practiced different climbing positions on ice and climbing using ice
pitons etc.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1959/43477444630_42202bfb22_o.jpg" alt="Base Camp Ice climbing practice"/>
  <figcaption>Base Camp Ice climbing practice</figcaption>
</figure>

In my opinion, NIM's ice craft area is much less in comparison of HMI.
It may be the time, when NIM may have to shift the base camp further up
to Advance Base Camp.

These two days. it was mostly revision of ice craft taught in basic
course. In the second half on the second day, we were involved in
checking of tents, which we'll be carrying to advance base camp (ABC) be
used in high altitude.

##### Day 14

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1950/44569945654_256880b5d1_o.jpg" alt="Advance Base Camp"/>
  <figcaption>Advance Base Camp without snow</figcaption>
</figure>

Today, we ferried load from base camp to advance base camp / ABC (13500 ft.).
With fairly heavy load the trek was tiring and I was huffing and puffing
on the way. It was like the last flat piece of very picturesque land in
cirque ahead. The surroundings form an amphitheater of mountains which
from north-east-south constitutes of Machha ki Dhar, Jaonli, Draupadi ka
Daanda, Choro ki Dhar and Rakhua Top. We dumped all the load like food
items, tents etc in a shelter made of rock and came back to the base
camp. It felt like a long walk. Back in the base camp this day, we had a
lecture on mountain terminology after lunch.


##### Day 15
We moved to ABC with our personal belongings. We were allowed to leave
few of our things which we thought would not be required above in ABC
and further.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1917/43477444130_28e21aa375_o.jpg" alt="Looking towards BC, from ABC"/>
  <figcaption>Looking towards BC, from ABC</figcaption>
</figure>

We reached ABC at 10:30 AM after leaving and wrapping up tents at base
camp. After some stretching exercises, we started pitching our
tents. We erected volleyball net and a stone shelter where kitchen staff
could heat water for us. Everybody was entitled for one hot bottle of
water every morning and evening for drinking purposes at base camp and
advance base camp. It was a lot of fun playing volleyball at ABC in the
surroundings it offer.


<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1925/44569947804_9c381b036d_o.jpg" alt="Dokrani glacier: Further ahead is our training area"/>
  <figcaption>Dokrani glacier: Further ahead is our training area</figcaption>
</figure>

##### Day 16, 17
We started the day by marching up to upper part of Dokrani glacier. Most
of the trek is on moraine and glacier.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1964/44569946954_eabcc92f4e_o.jpg" alt="Advance Ice Craft @ Dokrani Glacier"/>
  <figcaption>Advance Ice Craft @ Dokrani Glacier</figcaption>
</figure>

Training area is not very far from the campsite and there are ample ice
walls for all of us to practice. After demonstration of technique by our
instructors, we practiced the same.
We learned few advanced ice climbing techniques. This includes two piton
climbing, aid climbing on ice wall. In month of September, there wasn't
much snow on these ice walls. Very soon gloves would get and dirty with
fast melting ice and supra glacial moraine.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1971/31418060778_b1a9c7c0e9_o.jpg" alt=""/>
  <figcaption></figcaption>
</figure>

It was continuously hailing in the in the second half of the day. It
started snowing heavily in the evening which lasted till late night.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1966/31418061288_096d8a312d_o.jpg" alt="Advance Ice craft Training"/>
  <figcaption>Advance Ice craft Training</figcaption>
</figure>

For the duration of our stay at base camp we took ropewise turns to
prepare dinner our everybody, which was part of our training as told.

We also had a class on high altitude cooking with different kind of
fuels and stoves.

#### Phase 3: Snow Craft

##### Day 18
<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1952/31418060328_4f187a9c56_o.jpg" alt="Out tents in ABC in the morning after snow"/>
  <figcaption>Out tents in ABC in the morning after snow</figcaption>
</figure>

Since our phases of rock and ice craft was over, it was turn of snow
craft. In our time there wasn't much snow. It was decided to practice
snow craft on thin layer of packed snow patch with elevation of arounf
60 to 70 on a ridge of Machha ki Dhar which had ice beneath. Few people
including me found difficult to maintain balance and practice on this
patch. I had a fall which I couldn't arrest with ice axe while
practicing and twisted my ankle. It wasn't severe, but it got me
limping. It snowed again later in the afternoon. This completes our
training part.

#### Phase 4: Height Gain

##### Day 19
For our height gain we hoped to summit DKD-II if weather allowed. We
were warned that if weather doesn't allow we may not be able to reach
the summit and return halfway. Anyway at this we ferried load to our
Camp 1 (15800 ft.) which was also our summit camp. Loads included high
altitude tents butane gas cans, burners, technical gears and other
eatables.  It was an arduous task to ascent on continuous ice and
moraine. I had OTG (over the glass) snow goggles which were too foggy to
see and made the trek difficult. I had to walk without snow goggles most
of the time. After reaching there, we set up tents for kitchen and store
room and dumped our loads. The camp 1 area is a [cwm](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cirque) (pronounced *coom*). 
This is a relatively flat area completely on glacier and many crevasses around.
We could see all kinds of features of ice which we were told around. Ice
tables, serac, bergschrund, crevasses, overhanging glaciers. If we're
facing towards east, we had DKD on our right, but summit wasn't visible
from there. Jaonli was towards north or our left. Jaonli (6632 meters)
seemed so close as if we could walk over the summit. But standard way to
the Jaonli was from behind (relatively may be from north face). The
glaciers from Jaonli and DKD meet here to form the Dokrani glacier
(around 5 km long).
While returning from camp 1, weather got really bad. It was complete
whiteout. We trekked back in continuous snowfall. Drenched in sweat from
inside and wet from outside with snow and hail, we walked back to
advance base camp. After seeing this weather I really saw the dwindling
chance for the summit, as there was now a good chance that we may not be
going for the summit. If the weather doesn't clear soon, our chance to
summit DKD is going to be feeble. It snowed whole day. Windproofs were
completely wet. I kept my half wet clothes etc in sleeping bag to keep
them warm.

##### Day 20
We packed our bags early morning from ABC and did routine cleaning of
tent area before leaving. We reached camp 1 around 10:30 AM and started
pitching our tents on the glacier. There was some snow over the ice
which we beat to make the area for tent flat. We were getting tired
easily with heavy movement like lifting stones for preparing the camp
and other staff tents, kitchen etc. We could hear the water flowing
through the deep crevasses. There was hole dug in the ice which stored
some melted water in the day which we used for cooking maggi for lunch
and warming water. Each tent which accommodated some 5 people was given
a butane stove for cooking. With tents facing to each other on the ice
in a row, and everybody cooking outside; it looked like as if we've
established a small market on the glacier. After this, few handpicked
people (around 6 to 7) along with two instructors left for the recce and
route opening for tomorrow's summit attempt. Following them, rest of us
also left for making the moraine part of route a bit stable. We all made
cairns and fixed loose rocks along the way in the evening. We were told
that we'll have to wake up at 2 AM and leave for the summit attempt at 4
AM sharp. Anybody gets late will be left there only. It was freezing
cold in the night inside the tent. There wasn't much space inside the
tent and we kept our snow boots in the vestibule. Thinking of going to
loo instilled fear. There wasn't much time to sleep. I was guessing the
time between short naps. Our tent was continuously making flapping
sounds in wind. In night we could hear continuous deep noises of glacier
moving beneath us. I couldn't sleep in night. Sleeping bag got wet from
one side.

##### Day 21

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1939/31418060488_5e6e0e71a9_o.jpg" alt="Summit walk"/>
  <figcaption>Summit walk</figcaption>
</figure>

We woke up in very very early in the morning, like 2 AM and prepared ourselves for summit attempt.
Chilling wind was blowing as we equipped ourselves with the harness set
and other technical gear. I kept the breakfast in the bag and left for
the summit attempt. It was dark and everybody was wearing head torches. 
We started the ascent in the lateral moraine spanning high up towards
our way with the helps of cairns established last evening. Everybody was
walking briskly as if there was a very narrow time window for the summit.
We're told that if somebody gets too late he may have to return from
there only. After completing the ascent on moraine we put on crampons to
walk on the ice. It looked very beautiful to see these many people
ascending through the icy ridge with head-torches in the night.
Everybody was walking silently. The cold and the wind was making talking
difficult. At dawn, we reached a relatively flat area full of snow from
where we could the peak of DKD-II. Behind us we could see the peaks of
Gangotri valley. It was a magnificent view with the rising sun.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1907/44569946544_c7ff9c5642_o.jpg" alt="Sunrise @ Summit"/>
  <figcaption>Sun rise @ Summit</figcaption>
</figure>

Ahead of us ropes were being fixed by our ropemate Deepak Rana and our
instructor Subhash Thakur. It was a steep climb with unfathomable snow.
It was very difficult to walk on the steep ascent this much powdery
snow.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1926/44569946234_79fb03081b_o.jpg" alt="Summit"/>
  <figcaption>Summit</figcaption>
</figure>

We self anchored ourselves to the established fixed rope and started the
ascent. Trying to move ahead one step was making slide down further. But
somehow, I learned the trick to make proper steps and walk up. The sun
was rising. There were few crevsses hidden in deep snow which opened up
their faces with people moving over. Everybody was moving slow. At some
point we had to go one by one. After more than an hour of steep climb on
snow like quick sand I could see the last rope to the summit.

<figure>
  <img src="https://c2.staticflickr.com/2/1906/44569944794_8dd3a30740_o.jpg" alt="View from DKD-II"/>
  <figcaption>View from DKD-II</figcaption>
</figure>

I reached there around 8:15 AM. Opening the route, Deepak and Subhash
sir reached there around 7:45 am.We congratulated each other for our
successfully summit. It was blissful moment. We could see the surrounding
peaks protruding upside from the quilt of clouds. Senior instructor
Jagmohan Singh Rawat introduced us to the surrounding peaks. We could
see Shrikanth, Bandarpoonch Range, Kala Nag, Rudragaira, Gangotri Range, 
Jaonli, Nanda Devi, Kedar Dome, Kedarnath Valley DKD-I.
After that everybody got busy posing and clicking pictures. After some
15-20 mins, we started our descent. It was fairly difficult to
descending in steps in such steep snow. When we climbed down the major
part part, we were given few mins break for breakfast. There wasn't any
break before that. Common equipments like ropes changed hands and we
started climbing down with happiness on our faces. While we were
climbing down we could see the basic course guys at our camp 1, who were
there for there height gain phase. At camp 1, we were congratulated by
the kitchen staff and Chief Instructor for our successful climb. 
Everybody was completely exhausted after this arduous climb.After
reaching I pulled out the packed breakfast and shared it with my
ropemates. In our rope, I and one of my ropemate were little feverish
and went back to sleep. Everybody was really happy that we'll  be going
back to base camp tomorrow. Most of us were planning a grand party after
this course.

##### Day 21
We wrapped up our camp 1 and cleaned up the tent area. Trekked back to
base camp passing through advance base camp and depositing the technical
and other stuff  issued for camp 1. At base camp, we were greeted by all
the basic course instructors and basic course guys who were clapping for
our us. They congratulated us for our successful summit. We pitched our
tents at base camp and cleaned and dried wet equipments clothes etc.

##### Day 22
It was exam day. There were few objective and few short answer
subjective questions. After that we were competing for our map reading
exam. We're given 2 points to which we had to reach. We were mostly
running as one point was at Gujjar Hut and second was little off on the
way to ABC.

##### Day 23, 24
Trekking back first from BC to Tela and then Tela to Bhuki. We were all
happy to see other people and civilization. A bus from NIM was waiting
to take us to the institute. It was like 10 in the morning. Soon after
reaching there most of us got busy with writing the expedition report
which had to be submitted the next day. After bath and lunch in the
institute we submitted our equipments. In evening, we were allowed to go
to the market to get the expedition report printed.

##### Day 25 to end of course
We had graduation ceremony and there was a cultural event in which our
course-mates participated.

##### NIM Contact Info

*POSTAL ADDRESS*
<br>
PRINCIPAL,<br>
[Nehru Institute Of Mountaineering](http://www.nimindia.net/)<br>
Uttarkashi - 249193,<br>
Uttarakhand (India)<br>
<br>
Tel: +911374 - 222123, 224663, 223580<br>
Fax: +911374 - 222344<br>
Email: nimutk2004@gmail.com<br>
